So, our next goal is to make
my beautifully artistic sprites actually
change at runtime. So, in this
lecture we are going to talk about affordance, very briefly,
talk about what an array is and why we need it, and we're going to
use arrays to store these sprites, and then, we're going to load
the sprites when they get hit.
So, what is affordance? Well, basically the player should always
know what to do next. We want the multi-
hit blocks to show progress towards their demise,
and then, the player will know to keep hitting
them. So, you can read more about it on Wikipedia, if you wish.
And we're going to store our multiple
sprites, inside the program
in something called an array, which is a collection of data
items that can be selected by an index, computed at
runtime. Again, more on Wikipedia if you're
having trouble getting to sleep.
So, this is what we need to be doing. We need to get our
sprites, over here, into our code,
so that the code can load them for us.
So, go ahead and open up your Brick code.
And we're going to publicly expose something of
type Sprite, so we want to be able to
pass sprites in by the Inspector. But
we want an array, and that's what you do for an array,
square brackets, open, close. It looks like a box, right?
It's where we store things that are
similar, and I'm going to call it hitSprites:
OK,
so there we go! public Sprite array hitSprites;
Now, let's go to Unity, take a look at our prefab,
say for our two hit block.
And how many hit sprites will it have? Well, it will have one hit
sprite. It takes one level of damage
before dying. And what is that hit sprite?
Well, it's the 1 hit sprite,
alright. And then, go back to your Prefabs.
Have a look at the 1 hit sprite
prefab rather. That will have no hit
sprites, because it just dies immediately. The 2 hit
has 1 hit sprite, so what we're doing here is we have a little drop
down and we determine, in the Editor,
the size of our array. Then, we pass in the appropriate
number of sprites. What I want you to do, is as a
really simple challenge, is to go into the 3 hit
prefab and I want you to pass in both
of the 1 hit and 2 hit
breakage stages, this one and this one. So, go ahead and pause
the video and do that now for me.
OK,
so the way that I've done that is I go to
the 3 hit block and say, well how many hit sprites? Well,
it has 3 maximum hits, so we have two different
stages of damage, and here they are.
Stage 1 is 1 hit, stage 2 is 2 hits.
Back to our prefabs. Now, you'll notice the prefab
image here is also missing a main
sprite, which is like the default sprite. We could have,
of course, put that in this array. The problem is, we want to make sure that
we know what these things look like in the Editor, and if
all of your sprites are being handled by the code, then
it could look a bit funny in the Editor. It might change
immediately that you play. So, I'm choosing to have my
base sprite up here, under
the Sprite Renderer, and then, my hit stage is down here.
Now, if you've noticed that there's a redundancy
between this Max Hits variable and the number of hit
sprites, i.e., the Maximum Hits will always be the number of hit
sprites + 1. You're correct, and we'll deal with that
in a minute. So, let's play the
game now, and nothing will have changed but all
the sprites will look OK.
The other thing you might notice is your 3 hits sprite prefab here
may not look right. It may still be a blue box. When you click Save,
Save Scene, then that will
refresh OK. So, let's change the brick
base sprites as well now. They all have the same base
sprite. In fact, you can do that just by selecting all three prefabs.
Go to the sprites and drag the
0 hit on as their basic sprite. There we go!
Alright, so that's good! We
have a 1 hit that has a base sprite of
never having been hit and no hit sprites. A
2 hit that has a 0 hit and 1 hit sprite
and so on. Alright, hopefully that makes sense what's going on with
the number of hits. Now, what we need to do is actually
change the sprite at runtime, so dive back into
your code for me, and we'll take a look at how we
do that. So, it's
clearly going to be when the collision happens
that we want to do this.
And what we want to do is, only if we don't
destroy the object do we want to load sprites.
So, I'm going to put an else statement in here, and say
the thing gets hit, we increment the hit counter.
We find out whether or not it's greater than or equal to the
maximum hits. If it is, we destroy the brick immediately, like in the
case of the yellow block. If it's not
yet hit enough times to be destroyed, then we're going to load
sprites, like so.
Alright, so then we're going to need a method called
LoadSprites(). It doesn't need to return anything,
it doesn't need to take anything in,
but it does need to handle the sprite loading.
So, how are we going to do that? Well,
I'll just take you through the lines, like this. We need an integer to store
the spriteIndex, that we're going to access
in the array in the box, and it starts counting
at 0. We'll see that in a minute.
So, because it starts counting at 0, we need
this index to be timesHit - 1;
So, what's that all about? Let's go back to Unity and
have a look. Imagine these this 3 hit block here,
this element is Element 0 OK,
and the next element is Element 1. So,
imagine this block as been hit 1
time. So, it's been hit 1, it's less than
it's maxHits, which is 3. So, we
call LoadSprites(), we dive in here, and we say that the sprite
Index we want to load is the times
Hit - 1. Now, how many times has it
been hit? It's been hit once, so
that -1 is 0, so we load sprite
Index 0, which is the 1 hit Element
0. OK, hopefully that makes sense.
So, now comes the question,
how do we actually tell the machine to load
that sprite? Well,
It's part of this. It's part of this particular brick.
Then, we need to use a method called Get
Component
OK. And then, what we do with the
GetComponent, if we look over in Unity, is well what is the component
of the brick? Well, that's a good question.
It is the Sprite Renderer.
It's this Sprite Renderer. We're actually going to take one of the sprites
from down here, and put it onto the Sprite Renderer
up here, at runtime. Sprite you see.
So, it's this
.GetComponent. Now, it's a strange method, we've used it before.
Left chevron, <SpriteRenderer>
...
...like so.
It's a method, so we need to put the curly brackets,
and then, it's .sprite
And that may look a little bit overwhelming, but it's relatively
simple. Let's run it by again. This is the brick,
GetComponent<SpriteRenderer> takes us to here,
in the Inspector, and then, the actual
element we want is Sprite. So, we're going brick,
Sprite Renderer, Sprite. OK,
so that's the thing we want to change, and we're going to set it to
hitSprites, which is an array.
And we're going to tell it to pick the one at index
[spriteIndex], which is why we give it that nice name.
So, the index of 0 would be the first one,
at the first break stage, and then 1 would be the next break stage.
Let's try this code, as we are, and see how we get on.
So, here are our bricks. Let's try playing.
The yellow ones get destroyed immediately.
That's good news! Now, what happens to these green guys? Oh look!
Perfect! They're starting to take damage!
Now, let's see what happens when they get hit a second time. Well, this is
satisfying! We're actually making our
game look like a real game. We look like we need to know what we need to
do next. Eventually, I'll hit a green block
a second time, but
we're going to need some patience. Boom! Boom!
Boom! Boom! Boom! Boom!
Fine! When they get hit a second time, they disappear!
Wonderful!
So, let's make sure this works for the 3 hit
bricks, as well. So, you could
do this right in this scene, or we could take this opportunity to
improve our levels a little. So, Level_01 is two
brick types. Maybe Level_02
background is fine, but I'm going to ditch the bricks
in Level_02. I'm going to go back into Level_01,
copy all of the bricks in Level_01
into Level_02,
like so, and then, I think what I'm going to do is
add a splattering of 3 hit
bricks, just for fun. So, you do this however you like. This is
level design. The idea is that we're introducing the
player to new things, one stage
at a time. So, I'm going to put a few 3 hit
bricks. Maybe there and
there and
there
and there. I mean it doesn't really matter where I put them.
Probably better be in a bit more sympathy with the background. That's fine!
Now, what is a good idea, when you put your bricks in?
is to start organizing them, so
I could create an empty GameObject here,
Reset it's Transform, call
it Reds. That'll do. And then, I could just
group those in it, like so. So now, it's all nicely
organized, provided I put reds at the right level. Great!
So, all our bricks are organized and we have some red bricks. Let's play
Level_02 and make sure that they work. So, one hit, you get one
sprite. Now, that's why we may need to be patient again.
You can lay your bricks out, however you like.
Please do start designing your levels now,
start getting creative. Please make sure you introduce the player
to new brick types slowly. You may want your Level_01
to only have one brick, for example. There you go! That
red brick has worked! I'm going to pause the game. Look, the red brick there
has a second stage of damage, if we zoom in, in the Scene View.
You see it! That's working! Let's just carry on, for a second,
and just make sure that
the red bricks actually destroy. It's quite hard
talking incessantly, whilst actually
not losing the game.
Ah no! Almost
fun! Excuse my Menu Bar, it keeps popping up at the bottom there.
That's just because it's on Auto-Hide. So,
there's another red.
It can take a surprisingly long
time to play test that, so
no problem. I will just dive back in
really quickly, to Level_02. In fact, if you're having
that type of problem, why not make it easy for yourself? Why not,
for instance, take this red brick and
move it and then maybe put a few more of them along the top
here, so that it's easier to test. And you see how
they're childing nicely here, under the
three brick object this Reds object
I've already got. So, that's OK! Let's try it like
this! Some sort of fiddling you're going to
need to do to do the play testing.
So, the ball can't escaped so easily, so we get to test. Yeah! There they
go, and they've all disappeared and
working nicely. Beautiful! So, you have two stages of
damage, I think they're relatively clear. The background is showing
through. You have what we call affordance, i.e., the player knows what to
do next, and I think you should pat yourself on the back. Go ahead,
be a bit creative with your levels, and I'll see you soon!